MiMC exponents (#6)
clearmatics/zeth-specifications: chapters/chap03-sec02.tex

In fact, when considering security against algebraic attacks, we want (roughly speaking) the polynomial that defines the cipher to be of maximum degree and full (or at least, dense). That is we want the degree of the polynomial to be higher than $2^{\secpar}$. Since in $\mimc{}$ the S-box is defined as $S(x) = x^{\exponent{}}$, then after $\rounds$ rounds the degree of the polynomial describing the cipher is $\exponent{}^{\rounds}$. Hence, we need

\[
    \exponent{}^{\rounds} \geq 2^{\secpar}
\]
that is, we want
\[
    \rounds \geq \secpar \log_{\exponent}(2)
\]

\begin{remark}
    More rounds may be required as advised in~\cite{DBLP:conf/asiacrypt/Eichlseder0LORS20} to prevent some algebraic attacks that can be mounted when $\mimc{}$ is used over binary fields $\FFx{2^n}$.
\end{remark}

> It is important to note that the security analysis related to algebraic attacks relies on the fact that the polynomial describing the cipher is dense/full. If this assumption is violated, a more granular security analysis needs to be carried for the setting of interest.

Author: ```suggestion
It is important to note that the security analysis related to algebraic attacks relies on the fact that the polynomial describing the cipher is dense/full. If this assumption is violated, a more granular security analysis needs to be carried out for the setting of interest.
```

\begin{align*}
    \mimcPrime{\rCURVE} &: \FFx{\rCURVE} \times \FFx{\rCURVE} \to \FFx{\rCURVE}
\end{align*}

In the sections below, and as in ~\cite{albrecht2016mimc}, we will consider exponents of the form $\exponent{} = 2^t-1$ and $\exponent{} = 2^t+1$ where $\gcd(\exponent{}, \rCURVE-1) = 1$. We note that the term cancellation happening with exponents of the form $\exponent{} = 2^t+1$ does not immediatelly translate to the context where $\mimc{}$ is carried out over prime fields of large odd characteristic. In fact, in the case of $\FFx{\rCURVE}$, where $\rCURVE > \binom{\exponent}{\lfloor \exponent / 2 \rfloor}$, polynomials $(x + y)^{\exponent}$ are not sparse.
This comes from the \emph{Binomial Theorem}
\[
  (x + y)^\exponent = \sum_{i = 0}^{\exponent} \binom{\exponent}{i} x^{i}y^{\exponent - i}
\]
and the observation that if $\binom{\exponent}{i} < \rCURVE$ then $\binom{\exponent}{i} \bmod \rCURVE = \binom{\exponent}{i}$, hence ensuring that all the polynomial coefficients are greater than $0$, and that the polynomial is dense.

To achieve a security of $\secpar$, we require that $\rounds \geq \secpar \log_{\exponent}(2)$.

> Importantly, since we use $\mimc{}$ over prime fields $\FFx{\rCURVE}$ which are large (where $\rCURVE$ is the prime characteristic of the scalar field of an elliptic curve group, such that $\ceil{\log_2(\rCURVE)} > \secpar$ (i.e.~longer elements are needed in Elliptic Curve Cryptography (\ecc) to resist algebraic attacks such that Number Field Sieve (\acrnfs)-based attacks on discrete logs~\cite{DBLP:journals/siamdm/Gordon93} for instance)), then, picking $\rounds = \left\lceil \frac{\log_2 \rCURVE}{\log_2 \exponent{}} \right\rceil > \secpar \log_{\exponent}(2)$ provides a margin of safety on the number of rounds selected to instantiate $\mimc{}$ with desired security level $\secpar$.

Author: `such that` -> `such as`?
I think it may be worth breaking this paragraph into multiple sentences to make it a bit more readable and avoid the nested parentheses.

    \caption{\mimc{} Encryption function.}\label{instantiation:fig:mimc}
\end{figure*}

\mimcEnc{} can be defined on both binary and prime fields, and as such the $\mathsf{OP}$ operation corresponds to either $\oplus$ or $+ \pmod{p}$~\cite{albrecht2016mimc, grassi2016mpc}.
For general prime $p$ (resp.~ positive integer $n$), we denote by $\mimcPrime{p}$ (resp.~$\mimc{}_{2^n}$) the \mimcEnc{} function defined over \FFx{p} (resp.~\FFx{2^n}). In this document, we only consider \mimc{} defined over prime fields (in particular, the field $\FFx{\rCURVE}$ with elements written over $\secpar$ bits, over which \zksnark~operates).

Since block ciphers are usually defined over the product space of keys and messages, we consider the variables $c$, \rounds{} and \exponent{} as fixed. We thereby consider an instantiation of $\mimc{}$ with signature
\begin{align*}
    \mimcPrime{\rCURVE} &: \FFx{\rCURVE} \times \FFx{\rCURVE} \to \FFx{\rCURVE}
\end{align*}

\subsubsection{Security parameters and analysis}\label{instantiation:mkhash:mimc-encryption:security}

> To ensure that the exponentiation leads to a permutation in $\FFx{\rCURVE}$, we consider $\exponent{}$ of the form $\exponent{} = 2^t-1$ and $\exponent{} = 2^t+1$ such that $\gcd(\exponent{}, \rCURVE-1) = 1$. To achieve a security of $\secpar$, we require that $\rounds = \left\lceil \frac{\log_2 \rCURVE}{\log_2 \exponent{}} \right\rceil$.

Reviewer: Maybe better:
To ensure that the exponentiation leads to a permutation in $\FFx{\rCURVE}$, we consider $\exponent{}$ such that $\gcd(\exponent{}, \rCURVE-1) = 1$. To achieve a security of $\secpar$, we require that $\rounds = \left\lceil \frac{\log_2 \rCURVE}{\log_2 \exponent{}} \right\rceil$. For the sake of efficiency we consider $\exponent{} = 2^t + 1$.

I.e. I think "To ensure that the exponentiation leads to a permutation in $\FFx{\rCURVE}$, $\exponent{}$ of the form $\exponent{} = 2^t-1$ and $\exponent{} = 2^t+1$" is confusing since this form of exponent has little to do with ensuring a permutation. What ensures a permutation is the requirement on the GCD.

Also, when we get answer from Albrecht et al. and it is positive (i.e. that we can use 2^t + 1), I would drop references to 2^t - 1 as this form of coefficient won't be needed.

Author: Thanks.  Yes, I guess it could be read as though the form is part of the requirements for a permutation.  Changed to clarify this.

    \caption{\mimc{} Encryption function.}\label{instantiation:fig:mimc}
\end{figure*}

\mimcEnc{} can be defined on both binary and prime fields, and as such the $\mathsf{OP}$ operation corresponds to either $\oplus$ or $+ \pmod{p}$~\cite{albrecht2016mimc, grassi2016mpc}.
For general prime $p$ (resp.~ positive integer $n$), we denote by $\mimcPrime{p}$ (resp.~$\mimc{}_{2^n}$) the \mimcEnc{} function defined over \FFx{p} (resp.~\FFx{2^n}). In this document, we only consider \mimc{} defined over prime fields (in particular, the field $\FFx{\rCURVE}$ with elements written over $\secpar$ bits, over which \zksnark~operates).

Since block ciphers are usually defined over the product space of keys and messages, we consider the variables $c$, \rounds{} and \exponent{} as fixed. We thereby consider an instantiation of $\mimc{}$ with signature
\begin{align*}
    \mimcPrime{\rCURVE} &: \FFx{\rCURVE} \times \FFx{\rCURVE} \to \FFx{\rCURVE}
\end{align*}

\subsubsection{Security parameters and analysis}\label{instantiation:mkhash:mimc-encryption:security}

> In the original design proposed in the $\mimc{}$ paper~\cite{albrecht2016mimc}, the round function is represented as a ``shifted'' permutation via a cubic map (i.e.~the round input message is added to the key and round constant - the ``shift'' -, and a map $x^{\exponent{}}$ permutes the element in the underlying field $\FFx{2^n}$, $n \in \NN$, where $\gcd(\exponent{}, 2^n - 1) = 1$). This permutation function (hence invertible), acts as a substitution box (S-box) and brings non-linearity to the scheme, as usually required for security.

Author: ```suggestion
In the original design proposed in the $\mimc{}$ paper~\cite{albrecht2016mimc}, the round function is represented as a ``shifted'' permutation via a cubic map (i.e.~the round input message is added to the key and round constant - the ``shift'' -, and a map $x^{\exponent{}}$ permutes the element in the underlying field $\FFx{2^n}$, $n \in \NN$, where $\gcd(\exponent{}, 2^n - 1) = 1$). This function (which is a permutation and therefore invertible) acts as a substitution box (S-box) and brings non-linearity to the scheme, as usually required for security.
```

> In other sections of the paper, however, the $\mimc{}$ authors proposed generalizations to the initial design. These allow to use $\mimc{}$:

Author: ```suggestion
In other sections of the paper, however, the $\mimc{}$ authors proposed generalizations to the initial design. These allow $\mimc{}$ to be used:
```

\begin{itemize}
    \item over prime fields of odd characteristic (i.e.~$\FFx{p}$, $p$ odd prime),
    \item with different permutation polynomials (i.e.~using different exponents in the round function)
\end{itemize}

> Understanding the relationships between these various settings is required if one desires to use $\mimc{}$ to operate over prime fields of odd characteristic with a non-cubic permutation monomial.

Author: ```suggestion
Understanding the relationships between these various settings is required in order to use $\mimc{}$ to operate over prime fields of odd characteristic with a non-cubic permutation monomial.
```

> Overall, for $\mimc{}$ to be considered secure, it is important that no attack in the literature  (that may provide a significant speedup compared to ``exhaustive key search'') can succesfully be mounted by a $\ppt$ adversary. Two main families of attacks exist: statistical attacks and algebraic attacks.

Author: ```suggestion
Overall, for $\mimc{}$ to be considered secure, it is important that no attack in the literature (that may provide a significant speedup compared to ``exhaustive key search'') can succesfully be mounted by a $\ppt$ adversary. Two main families of attacks exist: statistical attacks and algebraic attacks.
```

\paragraph{Statistical attacks.}

> In the ``Security Analysis'' section~\cite[Section 4.2]{albrecht2016mimc}, the authors explain that since the cubic function is an APN, linear attacks pose no threat to $\mimc{}$.

Reviewer: What is an APN? That's not explained in the paper

Reviewer 2: Ah, I'll unroll this one. APN = Almost Perfect Nonlinear (functions)
(see the references I cite, i.e. `New Families of Almost Perfect Nonlinear Power Mappings` by Tor Helleseth, Chunming Rong, and Daniel Sandberg, and `Differentially Uniform Mappings for Cryptography` by Kaisa Nyberg - for more info. As this section should only be of interest to people interested in the security of MiMC in the various settings, I don't plan to provide all the background on PN/APN here -> I assume some domain knowledge)

Reviewer 2: I added a footnote to define k-uniformity and APN functions

> We observe that such claim aligns with~\cite[Theorem 2]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99}. In fact if $\mimc{}$ is operated over $\FFx{2^n}$, it is easy to see that the degree of the cubic map can be expressed as $3 = 2^t + 1$, where $t = 1$, and where $n$ and $1$ are trivially coprime. This case is covered by~\cite[Theorem 2]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99} which confirms that the cubic function $S(x) = x^3$ over $\FFx{2^n}$ is an APN/2-uniform mapping, as desired for differential and linear cryptanalysis resistance.

Author: ```suggestion
We observe that this claim aligns with~\cite[Theorem 2]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99}. In fact if $\mimc{}$ is operated over $\FFx{2^n}$, it is easy to see that the degree of the cubic map can be expressed as $3 = 2^t + 1$, where $t = 1$, and where $n$ and $1$ are trivially coprime. This case is covered by~\cite[Theorem 2]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99} which confirms that the cubic function $S(x) = x^3$ over $\FFx{2^n}$ is an APN/2-uniform mapping, as desired for differential and linear cryptanalysis resistance.
```

> We observe that this claim aligns with~\cite[Theorem 2]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99}. In fact if $\mimc{}$ is operated over $\FFx{2^n}$, it is easy to see that the degree of the cubic map can be expressed as $3 = 2^t + 1$, where $t = 1$, and where $n$ and $1$ are trivially coprime. This case is covered by~\cite[Theorem 2]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99} which confirms that the cubic function $S(x) = x^3$ over $\FFx{2^n}$ is an APN/2-uniform mapping, as desired for differential and linear cryptanalysis resistance.

Reviewer: > it is easy to see that the degree of the cubic map can be expressed as $3 = 2^t + 1$,
At this point of the paper it is not clear why we care about exponents of form 2^t + 1, thus I think this sentence may be confusing to a reader.

Reviewer 2: > At this point of the paper it is not clear why we care about exponents of form 2^t + 1, thus I think this sentence may be confusing to a reader.

This sentence is not related to the generalization of MiMC to other exponents. It is related to the Theorem 2 of `New Families of Almost Perfect Nonlinear Power Mappings` which shows that exponents of the form 2^t + 1, gcd (t, n) = 1 (n = extension degree of the underlying binary field) -> yield APNs, which is consistent with the claim the MiMC authors make in their security sections (but which does not provide further info w.r.t why the cubic map is an APN)

Reviewer 2: So it simply adds more "color" to the security section of MiMC by adding a ref to the Theorem that proves that the cubic map is an APN in their setting.

> We observe that this claim aligns with~\cite[Theorem 2]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99}. In fact if $\mimc{}$ is operated over $\FFx{2^n}$, it is easy to see that the degree of the cubic map can be expressed as $3 = 2^t + 1$, where $t = 1$, and where $n$ and $1$ are trivially coprime. This case is covered by~\cite[Theorem 2]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99} which confirms that the cubic function $S(x) = x^3$ over $\FFx{2^n}$ is an APN/2-uniform mapping, as desired for differential and linear cryptanalysis resistance.

Reviewer: "APN/2-uniform mapping" -- could we simple explain what is that? If not, could we / should we assume that the reader is well familiar with symmetric cryptography?

Reviewer 2: See: https://github.com/clearmatics/zeth-specifications/pull/6#discussion_r607895806

I'm happy to unroll the APN acronym, however, since this section is justifying some of the security claims around MiMC and its instantiation in the specs, I assume some domain knowledge here. If the reader is simply interested in implementing the protocol without bothering with the security proofs, they can still skip this section.

> We observe that this claim aligns with~\cite[Theorem 2]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99}. In fact if $\mimc{}$ is operated over $\FFx{2^n}$, it is easy to see that the degree of the cubic map can be expressed as $3 = 2^t + 1$, where $t = 1$, and where $n$ and $1$ are trivially coprime. This case is covered by~\cite[Theorem 2]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99} which confirms that the cubic function $S(x) = x^3$ over $\FFx{2^n}$ is an APN/2-uniform mapping, as desired for differential and linear cryptanalysis resistance.

Reviewer: What is a 2-uniform mapping? Is it explained somewhere in our paper? I would avoid using terms that are not defined in the paper.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/clearmatics/zeth-specifications/pull/6#discussion_r607898289

> Likewise, in~\cite[Section 5.1]{albrecht2016mimc} the authors claim that, provided that the cubic map is a permutation over the prime field of interest, then $\mimc{}$ can be used to operate over prime fields of odd characteristic. In this case too, $S(x) = x^3$ is an APN, provided $p \neq 3$ (as reported by~\cite[Theorem 3, item 3]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Likewise, in~\cite[Section 5.1]{albrecht2016mimc} the authors claim that, provided that the cubic map is a permutation over the prime field of interest, $\mimc{}$ can be used to operate over prime fields of odd characteristic. In this case too, $S(x) = x^3$ is an APN, provided $p \neq 3$ (as reported by~\cite[Theorem 3, item 3]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99}).
```
remolved "then" I think it is not necessary here

> Furthermore, while~\cite[Section 5.3]{albrecht2016mimc} proposes to relax the choice of the map degree to be of the general form $2^t \pm 1$, so long as the map remains a permutation, the authors showed that, out of these ``exponent shapes'', the case $\exponent{} = 2^t + 1$ is, unfortunately, not as good as it initially seems, in $\FFx{2^n}$, due to term cancellation in fields of characteristic 2 that renders the resulting polynomial ``sparse''\footnote{Since the round function is a polynomial, the whole scheme can be seen as a polynomial which overall degree and ``sparsity'' depend on the underlying field characteristic, degree of the round function and number of rounds.} (the degree of the polynomial will be bounded by $3^r$, $r$ being the number of rounds, which does not constitute an improvement on the status quo (i.e. $\exponent{} = 3$)). For this very reason, exponents of the form $2^t + 1, t > 1$, may not be of interest (sparse polynomial and more expensive arithmetic in the round function).

Reviewer: I am not convinced we need this discussion -- we don't use F_(2^n), do we?

Reviewer 2: We do not use MiMC over binary fields. However, this paragraph provides more info than what's provided in the MiMC paper (which simply provides security claims about round functions based on cubic maps)

> Furthermore, while~\cite[Section 5.3]{albrecht2016mimc} proposes to relax the choice of the map degree to be of the general form $2^t \pm 1$, so long as the map remains a permutation, the authors showed that, out of these ``exponent shapes'', the case $\exponent{} = 2^t + 1$ is, unfortunately, not as good as it initially seems, in $\FFx{2^n}$, due to term cancellation in fields of characteristic 2 that renders the resulting polynomial ``sparse''\footnote{Since the round function is a polynomial, the whole scheme can be seen as a polynomial which overall degree and ``sparsity'' depend on the underlying field characteristic, degree of the round function and number of rounds.} (the degree of the polynomial will be bounded by $3^r$, $r$ being the number of rounds, which does not constitute an improvement on the status quo (i.e. $\exponent{} = 3$)). For this very reason, exponents of the form $2^t + 1, t > 1$, may not be of interest (sparse polynomial and more expensive arithmetic in the round function).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In~\cite[Section 5.3]{albrecht2016mimc} proposes to relax the choice of the map degree to be of the general form $2^t \pm 1$. Unfortunately, the authors showed that the case $\exponent{} = 2^t + 1$ is not as good as it initially seems in $\FFx{2^n}$, due to term cancellation in fields of characteristic 2 that renders the resulting polynomial sparse\footnote{Since the round function is a polynomial, the whole scheme can be seen as a polynomial which overall degree and ``sparsity'' depend on the underlying field characteristic, degree of the round function and number of rounds.}. More precisely the degree of the polynomial will be bounded by $3^r$, $r$ being the number of rounds, which does not constitute an improvement on the case of $\exponent{} = 3$. For this very reason, exponents of the form $2^t + 1, t > 1$, may not be of interest (sparse polynomial and more expensive arithmetic in the round function).
```
I found the changed sentence too long and confusing. Tried to pass the same message a bit simpler.

> Likewise, if the map degree $\exponent{}$ is chosen to be of the form $2^t + 1$, with $\gcd(\exponent{}, 2^n - 1) = 1$ in the context of $\mimc{}$ over $\FFx{2^n}$, it is necessary to bear in mind that, without the extra requirement that $t$ needs to be coprime with $n$, then this case is not covered by~\cite[Theorem 2]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99}, and $S(x) = x^\exponent{}$ does not have differential 2-uniformity anymore - violating the claim made in~\cite[Section 4.2]{albrecht2016mimc} paragraph ``Linear Attacks'' about optimal resistance against linear and differential cryptanalysis. (In fact, depending on the value of $g = gcd(n, t)$, the map $S(x) = x^{2^t + 1}$ would be differentially $2^g$-uniform~\cite{DBLP:conf/eurocrypt/Nyberg93} - contrasting with the setting considered in paragraph ``Linear attacks'' where $\exponent{} = 3$).

Reviewer: I am not sure whether this paragraph is needed -- didn't we exclude e = 2^t + 1 for F_{2^n} in the previous paragraph? And, why we focus on F_2^n when we said we want to use F_p for a prime p?

Reviewer 2: > And, why we focus on F_2^n when we said we want to use F_p for a prime p?

I'll try to clarify the aim of this section. Here, I simply want to add more color to the security guarantees of MiMC is the various settings. In the MiMC paper, the authors provide security claims for the setting over binary fields where the round function uses a cubic map. However, in the next sections of the paper, they propose to relax the exponent shape to 2^t +- 1 and use MiMC over fields of odd characteristics. However, doing so isn't without consequences as it partially contradicts some of their claims in the security section (i.e. we don't manipulate APNs anymore etc). Hence, here I want to provide more color on the security of MiMC in the various settings. Then (and only then), we specify the setting we are interested in.

Reviewer 2: I restructured the section to move the paragraph saying that we focused on F_p **after** this security analysis.

> Likewise, if the map degree $\exponent{}$ is chosen to be of the form $2^t + 1$, with $\gcd(\exponent{}, 2^n - 1) = 1$ in the context of $\mimc{}$ over $\FFx{2^n}$, it is necessary to bear in mind that, without the extra requirement that $t$ needs to be coprime with $n$, then this case is not covered by~\cite[Theorem 2]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99}, and $S(x) = x^\exponent{}$ does not have differential 2-uniformity anymore - violating the claim made in~\cite[Section 4.2]{albrecht2016mimc} paragraph ``Linear Attacks'' about optimal resistance against linear and differential cryptanalysis. (In fact, depending on the value of $g = gcd(n, t)$, the map $S(x) = x^{2^t + 1}$ would be differentially $2^g$-uniform~\cite{DBLP:conf/eurocrypt/Nyberg93} - contrasting with the setting considered in paragraph ``Linear attacks'' where $\exponent{} = 3$).

Reviewer: > does not have differential 2-uniformity
I find that very confusing as differential 2-uniformity" has not been defined :/

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/clearmatics/zeth-specifications/pull/6#discussion_r607898289

> Likewise, if the map degree $\exponent{}$ is chosen to be of the form $2^t + 1$, with $\gcd(\exponent{}, 2^n - 1) = 1$ in the context of $\mimc{}$ over $\FFx{2^n}$, it is necessary to bear in mind that, without the extra requirement that $t$ needs to be coprime with $n$, then this case is not covered by~\cite[Theorem 2]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99}, and $S(x) = x^\exponent{}$ does not have differential 2-uniformity anymore - violating the claim made in~\cite[Section 4.2]{albrecht2016mimc} paragraph ``Linear Attacks'' about optimal resistance against linear and differential cryptanalysis. (In fact, depending on the value of $g = gcd(n, t)$, the map $S(x) = x^{2^t + 1}$ would be differentially $2^g$-uniform~\cite{DBLP:conf/eurocrypt/Nyberg93} - contrasting with the setting considered in paragraph ``Linear attacks'' where $\exponent{} = 3$).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Likewise, if the map degree $\exponent{}$ is chosen to be of the form $2^t + 1$, with $\gcd(\exponent{}, 2^n - 1) = 1$ in the context of $\mimc{}$ over $\FFx{2^n}$, it is necessary to bear in mind that, without the extra requirement that $t$ needs to be coprime with $n$, then this case is not covered by~\cite[Theorem 2]{DBLP:journals/tit/HellesethRS99}, and $S(x) = x^\exponent{}$ does not have differential 2-uniformity anymore - violating the claim made in~\cite[Section 4.2]{albrecht2016mimc} paragraph ``Linear Attacks'' about optimal resistance against linear and differential cryptanalysis. (In fact, depending on the value of $g = \gcd(n, t)$, the map $S(x) = x^{2^t + 1}$ would be differentially $2^g$-uniform~\cite{DBLP:conf/eurocrypt/Nyberg93} - contrasting with the setting considered in paragraph ``Linear attacks'' where $\exponent{} = 3$).
```

The case $\exponent{} = 2^t - 1$ does not yield an APN over $\FFx{2^n}$ either (except in the case $t = 2$ which reduces to the case $2^{t'} + 1$ for $t' = 1$). Similar observations show that picking round function degrees of the form $2^t \pm 1$ in the context where $\mimc{}$ is defined over prime fields $\FFx{p}$, $p$ odd prime, does not yield APNs.

\medskip

> Overall, when studying the resistance of $\mimc{}$ against statistical attacks, we are interested in the probability that an input difference ($d$) is mapped into an output difference ($D$). That is, we are studying the probability that:

Reviewer: What is the probability taken over?

Reviewer 2: We simply want to get the probability of the event: `E: f(x+d) - f(x) = D` here. The poly in the LHS is of degree e-1, which naturally gives the bound (e-1) for the number of solutions, and if we consider the field of size p, then we have that this proba is bounded by (e-1)/p

\[

>     F(x + d) - F(x) = D

Reviewer: What's F?

Reviewer 2: It simply represents a generic function here. If we want to study the proba that an input diff gets mapped to an output diff on a single round, then F = S (the round function), if we want to study this proba for the whole (resp. several rounds) cipher, F = poly that represents the cipher (resp. the poly that represents a few rounds of the cipher) etc.
Thanks for pointing that out though. If I forgot to explain what `F` was, that's definitely missing!

\]

Over a single round of $\mimc{}$, this probability is bounded by $(\exponent{}-1)/p$ \emph{provided that the exponent $\exponent{}$ is ``small''} (i.e.~small compared to the size of the field).

> By assuming that the different rounds of the scheme are independent, the probability that an input difference gets mapped to an output difference becomes bounded as $\Pr[F(x + d) - F(x) = D] \leq ((\exponent{}-1)/p)^\rounds$ ($\rounds$ being the number of rounds of the scheme).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By assuming that the different rounds of the scheme are independent, the probability that an input difference gets mapped to an output difference becomes bounded as $\Pr[F(x + d) - F(x) = D] \leq ((\exponent{}-1)/p)^\rounds$ .
```
Removed text in the bracket --- it was already told what \rounds are

For security, we want $((\exponent{}-1)/p)^\rounds$ to be bounded by $2^{-\secpar}$, where $\secpar$ is the security level (e.g.~128). Hence, we need
\[
    \left(\frac{\exponent{}-1}{p}\right)^\rounds \leq 2^{-\secpar}
\]
that is, we want
\[
    \rounds \geq \frac{\secpar}{\log_2(\frac{p}{\exponent{}-1})}
\]

As such, if the exponent is much smaller than the size of the field, few rounds are sufficient to prevent the differential attacks.

\paragraph{Algebraic attacks.}

> While choosing permutation monomials of degree $\exponent{} = 2^t \pm 1$ may not constitute APNs in the various $\mimc{}$ settings, it is important to note (as highlighted by Lorenzo Grassi in~\cite{mimc-security-communications}) that when working over finite fields $\FFx{p}$ of \emph{large} prime characteristic $p$ or extension fields $\FFx{2^n}$ of large extension degrees $n$, the algebraic attacks (exploiting the low-degree of the cipher) are much more efficient than the statistical attacks (i.e.~they can break a much higher number of rounds).

Author: ```suggestion
While permutation monomials of degree $\exponent{} = 2^t \pm 1$ may not constitute APNs in the various $\mimc{}$ settings, it is important to note (as highlighted by Lorenzo Grassi in~\cite{mimc-security-communications}) that when working over finite fields $\FFx{p}$ of \emph{large} prime characteristic $p$ or extension fields $\FFx{2^n}$ of large extension degrees $n$, the algebraic attacks (exploiting the low-degree of the cipher) are much more efficient than the statistical attacks (i.e.~they can break a much higher number of rounds).
```

> While permutation monomials of degree $\exponent{} = 2^t \pm 1$ may not constitute APNs in the various $\mimc{}$ settings, it is important to note (as highlighted by Lorenzo Grassi in~\cite{mimc-security-communications}) that when working over finite fields $\FFx{p}$ of \emph{large} prime characteristic $p$ or extension fields $\FFx{2^n}$ of large extension degrees $n$, the algebraic attacks (exploiting the low-degree of the cipher) are much more efficient than the statistical attacks (i.e.~they can break a much higher number of rounds).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While permutation monomials of degree $\exponent{} = 2^t \pm 1$ may not constitute APNs in the various $\mimc{}$ settings, it is important to note (as highlighted by Grassi in~\cite{mimc-security-communications}) that when working over finite fields $\FFx{p}$ of \emph{large} prime characteristic $p$ or extension fields $\FFx{2^n}$ of large extension degrees $n$, the algebraic attacks (exploiting the low-degree of the cipher) are much more efficient than the statistical attacks (i.e.~they can break a much higher number of rounds).
```
Let's stick to family names

In fact, when considering security against algebraic attacks, we want (roughly speaking) the polynomial that defines the cipher to be of maximum degree and full (or at least, very dense). That is we want the degree of the polynomial to be higher than $2^{\secpar}$. Since in $\mimc{}$ the S-box is defined as $S(x) = x^{\exponent{}}$, then after $\rounds$ rounds the degree of the polynomial describing the cipher is $\exponent{}^{\rounds}$. Hence, we need

\[
    \exponent{}^{\rounds} \geq 2^{\secpar}
\]
that is, we want
\[
    \rounds \geq \secpar \log_{\exponent}(2)
\]

\begin{remark}
    More rounds may be required as advised in~\cite{DBLP:conf/asiacrypt/Eichlseder0LORS20} to prevent some algebraic attacks that can be mounted when $\mimc{}$ is used over binary fields $\FFx{2^n}$.
\end{remark}

It is important to note that the security analysis related to algebraic attacks relies on the fact that the polynomial describing the cipher is dense/full. If this assumption is violated, a more granular security analysis needs to be carried for the setting of interest.

\begin{notebox}

>     For \emph{small exponents and large prime fields} (e.g.~for $\secpar = 128$, $p = 2^{128}$ and $\exponent{} = 3$), we see that the lower bound on the number of rounds is (much) smaller in the context of statistical attacks than in the context of algebraic attacks. As such, we see that in such settings algebraic attacks are much more powerful than statistical attacks. Hence, when instanting $\mimc{}$ with an \emph{small} exponent of the form $2^t \pm 1$, it is crucial to make sure that, even if the resulting map is not an APN, the polynomial describing the cipher remains full/very dense. Importantly, if the setting is changed (e.g.~to use exponents that are ``big'' w.r.t.~the field size) the security analysis proposed in~\cite{albrecht2016mimc} must be changed.

Reviewer: > full/very dense
what is a difference between "dense" and "very dense"?
Maybe let's just stick with dense. And since "full" polynomials are "dense" as well -- let's simplify full/dense to just dense

Reviewer 2: Sounds good, I'll switch to `dense`

\end{notebox}

\medskip

> In the sections below, and as in ~\cite{albrecht2016mimc}, we will consider exponents of the form $\exponent{} = 2^t-1$ and $\exponent{} = 2^t+1$ where $\gcd(\exponent{}, \rCURVE-1) = 1$ (such that exponentiation by $\exponent{}$ yields a permutation on $\FFx{\rCURVE}$). We note that the term cancellation happening with exponents of the form $\exponent{} = 2^t+1$ does not immediatelly translate to the context where $\mimc{}$ is carried out over prime fields of large odd characteristic. In fact, in the case of $\FFx{\rCURVE}$, where $\rCURVE > \binom{\exponent}{\lfloor \exponent / 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the sections below, and as in ~\cite{albrecht2016mimc}, we will consider exponents of the form $\exponent{} = 2^t-1$ and $\exponent{} = 2^t+1$ where $\gcd(\exponent{}, \rCURVE-1) = 1$ . We note that the term cancellation happening with exponents of the form $\exponent{} = 2^t+1$ does not immediatelly translate to the context where $\mimc{}$ is carried out over prime fields of large odd characteristic. In fact, in the case of $\FFx{\rCURVE}$, where $\rCURVE > \binom{\exponent}{\lfloor \exponent / 2
```
Removed "(such that exponentiation by $\exponent{}$ yields a permutation on $\FFx{\rCURVE}$)" asit was alraedy explaned why we need gcd to be 1

  \rfloor}$, polynomials $(x + y)^{\exponent}$ are not sparse. This comes from the \emph{Binomial Theorem}
\[
  (x + y)^\exponent = \sum_{i = 0}^{\exponent} \binom{\exponent}{i} x^{i}y^{\exponent - i}
\]
and the observation that if $\binom{\exponent}{i} < \rCURVE$ then $\binom{\exponent}{i} \bmod \rCURVE = \binom{\exponent}{i}$, hence ensuring that all the polynomial coefficients are greater than $0$, and that the polynomial is dense.

To achieve a security of $\secpar$, we require that $\rounds \geq \secpar \log_{\exponent}(2)$.

> Importantly, since we use $\mimc{}$ over prime fields $\FFx{\rCURVE}$ which are large (where $\rCURVE$ is the prime characteristic of the scalar field of an elliptic curve group, such that $\ceil{\log_2(\rCURVE)} > \secpar$ (i.e.~longer elements are needed in ECC to resist algebraic attacks such that NFS-based attacks on discrete logs for instance)), then, picking $\rounds = \left\lceil \frac{\log_2 \rCURVE}{\log_2 \exponent{}} \right\rceil > \secpar \log_{\exponent}(2)$ provides a margin of safety on the number of rounds selected to instantiate $\mimc{}$ with desired security level $\secpar$.

Reviewer: NFS -- although many would know what it is we need to expand the abbreviation when it is used for the first time

Reviewer 2: Sure, I'll unroll this one

\[
    \constraints = \rounds \cdot \mults + 1
\]

> where $\rounds = \lceil \frac{\log_2 \rCURVE}{\log_2 \exponent{}} \rceil$, $\mults$ is the number of multiplications required for exponentiation and the additional constraint (corresponding to $+1$ in the above formula) is a result of the final message and key addition. Note that for $\exponent = 2^t - 1$ we have $\mults = 2 \cdot t - 2$, using the \emph{square-and-multiply} algorithm~\cite{menezes1996handbook}, and for $\exponent = 2^t + 1$ we have $mults = t + 1$.

Author: REMINDER: The statement above:

> Note that small exponents $\exponent{}$ result in fewer constraints in the arithmetic circuit ...

needs to be reworded before this is merged (assuming there is no problem with 2^t+1).
